---
title: "cifkit: A user-friendly Python package for high-throughput CIF analysis"
tags:
  - Python
  - CIF
  - crystallography
  - materials science
  - solid state chemistry
  - crystal structure
  - machine learning

authors:
  - name: Sangjoon Lee
    orcid: 0000-0002-2367-3932
    corresponding: true
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Anton O. Oliynyk
  - orcid: 0000-0003-0732-7340
    affiliation: "2, 3"
affiliations:
  - name: Department of Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
    index: 1
  - name: Department of Chemistry, Hunter College, City University of New York, New York, NY 10065, USA
    index: 2
  - name: Ph.D. Program in Chemistry, The Graduate Center of the City University of New York, New York, NY 10016, USA
    index: 3

date: 29 August 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

`cifkit` is designed to provide a set of intuitive utility functions and
variables for processing large datasets, on the order of tens of thousands of
.cif files. `cifkit` serves as an engine for building Python applications that
automate crystal structure analysis, enabling the extraction of physics-based
information crucial for understanding geometric configurations and identifying
irregularities. `cifkit` also offers various tools for determining coordination
numbers, plotting coordination geometry-based polyhedron from each site,
calculating bond fractions, moving and copying .cif files based on a set of
attributes, and determining atomic mixing information.

# Statement of need

In solid state chemistry and materials science, the Crystallographic Information
File (CIF) [@hall_crystallographic_1991] is the predominant file format used to
store and distribute crystal structure information. There are open-source Python
packages that read, edit, and create CIF files. Python Materials Genomics
(pymatgen) [@ong_python_2013] offers functionalities beyond the aforementioned
features, such as generating electronic structure properties and phase diagrams.
Similarly, the Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE) [@larsen_atomic_2017]
provides a suite of powerful tools for generating and running atomistic
simulations. However, both projects are tailored for users with prior
programming experience, often necessitating the use of the tools with API
documentation.

Given that .cif files are primarily generated by experimentalists, often with
the help of software, `cifkit` is designed for users with limited programming
backgrounds to lower the entry barrier for the experimentalist community. This
tool allows members to analyze their synthesized materials using numerical
descriptions, including complex tasks such as extracting descriptors for
geometry-based polyhedra from each atomic site. `cifkit` helps systematically
describe materials and automatically extract intuitive, physics-based, and
measurable information from .cif files, tasks that may require time-consuming
manual work with GUI-based tools like VESTA, Diamond, and CrystalMaker.
Furthermore, `cifkit` offers unique functionalities to visualize the
distribution of file counts based on attributes, extract atomic mixing
information at the bond pair level, preprocess .cif files to parse the atomic
site element from the atomic site label, and identify and separate ill-formatted
files in a few lines of code. By simplifying user interactions while maintaining
robust functionality, `cifkit` enables a broader range of scientists to leverage
computational tools in their research.

# Examples

The following example code demonstrates the user-friendly nature of the tool for
users with limited programming experience. The full installation process can be
executed via a Jupyter notebook, which is distributed through the Google Colab
URL provided in the official documentation.

```python
from cifkit import Cif, Example

# Initalize with the .cif file path
cif = Cif(Example.Er10Co9In20_file_path)
cif.formula
cif.structure
cif.unique_elements
cif.unitcell_lengths
cif.unitcell_angles
```

To extract information from a set of .cif files:

```python
from cifkit import CifEnsemble, Example

# Initalize with the folder path containing .cif files
ensemble = CifEnsemble(Example.ErCoIn_big_folder_path)
ensemble.unique_formulas
ensemble.unique_structures
ensemble.unique_elements

# Determine shortest pair distance per .cif file
ensemble.minimum_distances

# Filter .cif by formula
ensemble.filter_by_formulas(["LaRu2Ge2"])

# Filter .cif by space group name
ensemble.filter_by_space_group_names("Im-3m")
```

# Applications 

`cifkit` serves as a core package for building applications used by academic and
national laboratories for crystal structural analysis and machine learning
studies. CIF Bond Analyzer (CBA) utilizes `cifkit` to extract coordination
geometry information for newly a discovered phase [@tyvanchuk_crystal_2024]. The
Structure Analysis/Featurizer (SAF) employs `cifkit` to construct and extract
physics-based geometric features for binary and ternary compounds. Furthermore,
geometric features generated with `cifkit` are being incorporated into a
follow-up study on thermoelectric materials [@barua_interpretable_2024],
building upon the compositional properties explored in [@lee_machine_2024].

# Testing and documentation

97 percent of the code is covered according to Codecov. The documentation is
provided at https://bobleesj.github.io/cifkit.

# Acknowledgement

We acknowledge the initial testing done by Nishant Yadav, Siddha Sankalpa Sethi,
and Arnab Dutta from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. We also
thank Emil Jaffal, Danila Shiryaev, and Alex Vtorov from CUNY Hunter College for
testing. We acknowledge Fabian Zills for his recommendations on Python tooling.

# References
